title: Meditation 1
bibliography: /Users/Roambot/Dropbox/PDFLibrary/Master.bib
status: hidden

---

# Meditation One

The title of the first *Meditation* is "what can be called into doubt". Here
Descartes lays out his method of doubt, calling on the reader to give up those
beliefs which cannot be rendered absolutely certain. Descartes (or the
Meditator) motivates the method by claiming it as necessary if one wanted "to
establish anything in the sciences that was stable and likely to last" (AT VII:17)

## A Foundationalist Project

A common way of understanding the structure of human knowledge, and one which
Descartes seems to endorse, considers some bits of human knowledge as more basic
than others, and considers the warrant for this more derivative knowledge as
deriving from the more basic. The basic knowledge is not dependent on its being
inferred from any other knowledge. This is what makes it basic. Call the
position that all knowledge (or warrant) rests ultimately on a foundation of
non-inferentially acquired knowledge (or warrant)
*[foundationalism](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/justep-foundational/)*.

The Meditator seems to endorse a foundationalist conception of human knowledge
in the opening paragraphs of the *First Meditation*, and of pursuing a strategy of
establishing a stable and lasting science on foundations which are immune
to doubt. The Meditator also makes clear that he is interested primarily in
theoretical knowledge rather than knowledge sufficient for guiding action.

>I know that no danger or error will result from my plan, and that I cannot
>possibly go too far in my distrustful attitude. This is because the task now in
>hand does not involve action but merely the acquisition of knowledge. (AT
>VII:22)

If it is clear that Descartes (or the Meditator) pursues a foundationalist
epistemology in the *Meditations*, it is less clear how we should construe the
nature of this foundation. There are two projects, apparently running side by
side, and it is not always clear which Descartes pursues. On the one hand, we
have a *normative* project of working our which beliefs we are *epistemically
entitled* to hold. These are such beliefs, given the method of doubt, concerning
which there is *no reason* to doubt. On the other hand, there is the wish to
create a stable and lasting foundation for the sciences. In other words, a
foundation which we are *psychologically unable* to doubt (cf. @smyth1986;
@loeb1990; @bennett2001a).

It may well be that these two projects are compatible. But it isn't obvious
that they converge. One may be unable to doubt what is nevertheless false, and
one may be rather uncertain of what is in fact true. 

## The Method of Doubt

In order that he may arrive at a correct metaphysics Descartes argues that we must suspend judgment concerning any proposition whose truth is not known with absolute certainty. 

>[To accomplish the goal of determining which of my judgments are absolutely certain]
>Reason now leads me to think that I should hold back my assent from opinions
>which are not completely certain and indubitable just as carefully as I do from
>those which are patently false. So, for the purpose of rejecting all my
>opinions, it will be enough if I find in each of them at least some reason for
>doubt. (AT VII:18)

One might reasonably ask why this is necessary. Couldn't we just hive off our
metaphysical beliefs from our other beliefs until we figure out the correct
metaphysical theory? Descartes suggests otherwise. He compares his method to one
in which one sorts the bad apples out of an apple basket.

>Suppose he had a basket full of apples and, being worried that some of the
>apples were rotten, wanted to take out the rotten ones to prevent the rot
>spreading. How would he proceed? Would he not begin by tipping the whole lot
>out of the basket? And would not the next step be to cast his eye over each
>apple in tum, and pick up and pour back in the basket only those he saw to be
>sound, leaving the others? In just the same way, those who have never
>philosophized correctly have various opinions in their minds which they have
>begun to store up since childhood, and which they therefore have reason to
>believe may in many cases be false. They then attempt to separate the false
>beliefs from the others, so as to prevent their contaminating the rest and
>making the whole lot uncertain. Now the best way they can accomplish this is
>to reject all their beliefs together in one go, as if they were all uncertain
>and false. They can then go over each belief in turn and re-adopt only those
>which they recognize to be true and indubitable. (VII:481)

Since the false beliefs 'contaminate' and potentially render 'the whole lot
uncertain' Descartes argues the best strategy is to turn them all out in one go.
Otherwise, he seems to think we run the risk of retaining false beliefs, which
may be hidden among the good ones that they have 'contaminated'.

## The Goal of Doubt 

In the synopsis Descartes says concerning his method of doubt that,

>its greatest benefit lies in freeing us from all our preconceived opinions, and
>providing the easiest route by which the mind may be led away from the senses.
>The eventual result of this doubt is to make it impossible for us to have any
>further doubts about what we subsequently discover to be true. (VII:12)

So the method of doubt is supposed to have a positive and salutary effect on the
belief system of the doubter, bringing them around to what Descartes believes
are the correct metaphysical beliefs, which cannot themselves be doubted.

This is important to notice, because it shows that Descartes is not interested in
skepticism for its own sake, nor simply for its role in freeing the mind from
prejudicial beliefs, but rather specifically for its capacity to orient the
subject towards the correct metaphysical view.

One further question is whether the method of doubt is supposed to yield anything further than a proper basis for physics. In particular, several interpreters have argued that Descartes's broader aim is a vindication of reason, either in the weak sense of investigating all grounds for doubt and finding them flawed, or in the strong sense of demonstrating that not only are there no grounds to *doubt* the capacity of reason to grasp truths about reality, but there is in fact a positive basis for believing that reason alone could provide knowledge of the nature or structure of reality (@hatfield2003, 94-5; cf. @frankfurt2008, ch.1; @williams1978, ch.2). The progression of Descartes's argument in the *Meditations* plausibly provides some basis for the weak vindication. Because of the demanding nature of its claim, the strong vindication stands in greater doubt. We'll return to this in our examination of the other meditations.  

## Against Empiricism

The lion's share of the first *Meditation* is concerned with doubting the
deliverances of sense. The structure of the argument proceeds roughly as
follows:

>* Sensory foundations (VII:18)
   * Sensory fallibility (VII:18-19)
   * Objection: Optimal circumstances (VII:19)
   * Objection: Insanity (VII:18-19)
   * The dream argument (VII:19)
   * Objection: The painter’s analogy (VII:19-20)
   * Deceitful God; Dubitability of mathematics (VII:21)
   * The corrective role of doubt (VII:22)
   * The evil demon (VII:22-3)

Why argue against empiricism? There are at least two reasons motivating
Descartes. The first is that empiricism is dominant in Aristotelian
school philosophy. Insofar as Descartes is looking to articulate a new
foundation for physics, one distinct from that traditionally offered by
Scholastic Aristotelianism, he needs to argue against their epistemology.

Second, Descartes also considers empiricism to capture the natural human default
attitude. He begins ¶3 of the *First Meditation* with the claim that "Whatever I
have up till now accepted as most true I have acquired either from the senses or
through the senses." He says this not just because it is a scholastic doctrine
but because he thinks it the natural human attitude to trust the senses above
all, and if nothing else, then out of habit (¶11, ATVII:22). One way to thus
understand the aim of the *Mediations* is as attempting to dislodge the
meditating subject's trust in the senses and the epistemic habits formed
therefrom.

# References

